_pages/index.md, before:

---
title: ""
layout: archive
sitemap: true
permalink: /
author_profile: true
---

<img src="/assets/images/photovamshi.PNG" width="340px" alt="Vamshi Kodipaka" align="right" style="margin-left: 40px; margin-bottom: 10px;" />

# About


I am a PhD Researcher at the [University of Coimbra](https://www.uc.pt/) and am forging lifelines in the untamed wilderness. I craft drone navigation systems, employing computer vision, robotics, and AI to pierce the fog of missing person searches, transforming technology into rescue. I am fortunate to find [Prof. Helder Araujo](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=67), [Prof. Lino Marques](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=84) and [Prof. Rui Cortesao](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=90) as my advisors. My current research is funded by [FCT](https://www.fct.pt/en/), Portugal and is associated with [Institute of Systems & Robotics - Coimbra](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=2167) (Field Robotics Group).

My research also transforms drone critical missions, including their role as first responders, enhancing precision agriculture, environmental monitoring, wildfire management, and disaster assessment. These missions enhance the speed, safety, and effectiveness of search and rescue, especially in dangerous or remote environments. They are used to augment and support human teams with key applications like rapid area assessment, person and vehicle detection, communication relay, payload delivery, intelligence, and reconnaissance.

I achieved the robustness for tiny aerial person detection by proposing hybrid YOLO-Transformers, Synaptic Attention and Retention. Currently, I focus is Drone Autonomy: Adaptive Informative Path Planning that is to dynamically plan the most efficient search route based on the terrain, weather conditions, cues and last-known location of the missing person. It avoids obstacles in real-time and prioritizes areas with a higher probability of detection. I use ROS+NVIDIA Jetson Edge device for validation of the proposed methods.

Beyond the lab, I am propelled and captivated by the [Mohammed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge (MBZIRC)](https://www.mbzirc.com/about-us), Abu Dhabi's biennial event that pushes global real-world robotic frontiers, catalyzing resilient solutions and breakthroughs that redefine exploration and cutting-edge innovation.

Experienced in 3 National Projects specializing in the fields of Computer Vision and Robotics. Super nerd who loves and enjoys his work. An adaptive team player, a quick learner with enthusiasm to explore new avenues inspired by exemplary ideas. My motto is to add value to everything I do.

I worked as a Research Fellow at University of Coimbra, this fellowship was advised by [Prof. David Portugal](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=8) and [Prof. Joao Ferreira](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=5). Prior to joining UC, I obtained a M.Sc. degree in Computer Vision in the Erasmus [VIBOT](https://www.vibot.org/) (VIsion and RoBOTics) program at the [Université de Bourgogne](https://www.ube.fr/en/home/), France. I was a [TS MJBP OBC Overseas Scholar](https://telanganaepass.cgg.gov.in/OverseasLinks.do). I did my master thesis which was advised by [Prof. Antonio Franchi](https://people.utwente.nl/a.franchi) at LAAS-CNRS, France. I received a B.Tech. degree in [Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering](https://www.kitsw.ac.in/departments/EI/home.html) at Kakatiya University, India. 

My Personality: Roboticist, Visionary, Purpose-Driven, Innovative, Adaptive, Catalytic and Empathic

Follow me for more updates!

<img src="https://visitor-badge.laobi.icu/badge?page_id=vamshikodipaka.vamshikodipaka.github.io" alt="visitor badge"/>

Commit message:

Update experience section with Marine Robotics Summer School
Added experience as a Summer Trainee for Marine Robotics Summer School 2024 and retained previous research fellow details.

_pages/index.md, after:

---
title: ""
layout: archive
sitemap: true
permalink: /
author_profile: true
---

<img src="/assets/images/photovamshi.PNG" width="340px" alt="Vamshi Kodipaka" align="right" style="margin-left: 40px; margin-bottom: 10px;" />

# About


I am a PhD Researcher at the [University of Coimbra](https://www.uc.pt/) and am forging lifelines in the untamed wilderness. I craft drone navigation systems, employing computer vision, robotics, and AI to pierce the fog of missing person searches, transforming technology into rescue. I am fortunate to find [Prof. Helder Araujo](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=67), [Prof. Lino Marques](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=84) and [Prof. Rui Cortesao](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=90) as my advisors. My current research is funded by [FCT](https://www.fct.pt/en/), Portugal and is associated with [Institute of Systems & Robotics - Coimbra](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=2167) (Field Robotics Group).

My research also transforms drone critical missions, including their role as first responders, enhancing precision agriculture, environmental monitoring, wildfire management, and disaster assessment. These missions enhance the speed, safety, and effectiveness of search and rescue, especially in dangerous or remote environments. They are used to augment and support human teams with key applications like rapid area assessment, person and vehicle detection, communication relay, payload delivery, intelligence, and reconnaissance.

I achieved the robustness for tiny aerial person detection by proposing hybrid YOLO-Transformers, Synaptic Attention and Retention. Currently, I focus is Drone Autonomy: Adaptive Informative Path Planning that is to dynamically plan the most efficient search route based on the terrain, weather conditions, cues and last-known location of the missing person. It avoids obstacles in real-time and prioritizes areas with a higher probability of detection. I use ROS+NVIDIA Jetson Edge device for validation of the proposed methods.

Beyond the lab, I am propelled and captivated by the [Mohammed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge (MBZIRC)](https://www.mbzirc.com/about-us), Abu Dhabi's biennial event that pushes global real-world robotic frontiers, catalyzing resilient solutions and breakthroughs that redefine exploration and cutting-edge innovation.

Experienced in 3 National Projects specializing in the fields of Computer Vision and Robotics. Super nerd who loves and enjoys his work. An adaptive team player, a quick learner with enthusiasm to explore new avenues inspired by exemplary ideas. My motto is to add value to everything I do.

I was a Summer Trainee for Marine Robotics Summer School 2024, organized by [MIT](https://www.mit.edu/) & [MIT Portugal](https://mitportugal.org/activity/2024-marine-robotics-summer-school/) that took place in Azores Islands, Portugal. I worked as a Research Fellow at University of Coimbra, this fellowship was advised by [Prof. David Portugal](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=8) and [Prof. Joao Ferreira](https://www.isr.uc.pt/index.php/people?task=showpeople.show%28%29&idPerson=5). Prior to joining UC, I obtained a M.Sc. degree in Computer Vision in the Erasmus [VIBOT](https://www.vibot.org/) (VIsion and RoBOTics) program at the [Université de Bourgogne](https://www.ube.fr/en/home/), France. I was a [TS MJBP OBC Overseas Scholar](https://telanganaepass.cgg.gov.in/OverseasLinks.do). I did my master thesis which was advised by [Prof. Antonio Franchi](https://people.utwente.nl/a.franchi) at LAAS-CNRS, France. I received a B.Tech. degree in [Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering](https://www.kitsw.ac.in/departments/EI/home.html) at Kakatiya University, India. 

My Personality: Roboticist, Visionary, Purpose-Driven, Innovative, Adaptive, Catalytic and Empathic

Follow me for more updates!

<img src="https://visitor-badge.laobi.icu/badge?page_id=vamshikodipaka.vamshikodipaka.github.io" alt="visitor badge"/>
